#LyX 1.1 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 2.15
\textclass article
\language american
\inputencoding default
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 0
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Title


\series medium 
D
\series default 
e
\series medium 
tection, repr
\series default 
e
\series medium 
sentation 
\series default 
and
\series medium 
 mod
\series default 
e
\series medium 
l
\series default 
ing
\series medium 
 
\series default 

\newline 
of
\series medium 
 surfaces 
\series default 
from 3D
\series medium 
 structures.
 
\series default 

\newline 

\series medium 
Application 
\series default 
to the study of long bones 
\newline 
morphology and functionality
\series medium 
.
\layout Author

Luis Ibáñez
\layout Section*

Abstract
\layout Standard

The aim of this Ph.D.
 dissertation is to make a contribution to the understanding of bone joint
 functionality and its relation with morphology-based constrains.
\layout Standard

\i \={I}
n order to get a representation of bone morphology we started by extracting
 surfaces from medical data volumes.
 In this direction we studied several methods for surface detection and
 reconstruction.
\layout Standard

From this study we concluded that the local nature of surface detectors
 make impossible for them to provide information about the global morphology
 of an anatomical structure contained in a medical image.
 On the other hand, the surface reconstruction methods can not guarantee
 the topological correctness of the resulting surface, nor grant that they
 correspond to the real anatomical structure wanted.
 
\layout Standard

Our analysis of surface extraction methods leaded us to a deep study on
 discrete topology.
 As a result of this study we found that the optimal grid for sampling 3D
 data volumes is the BCC grid.
 This optimality being valid from the signal processing point of view, as
 well as from the discrete topology point of view.
 We have designed and implemented a set of methods for manipulating this
 kind of grid.
 The most important among them are: a variation of the 
\emph on 
marching cubes
\emph default 
 algorithm and a 
\emph on 
line tracing
\emph default 
 algorithm for non-orthogonal grid of dimension N.
\layout Standard

Given that low level methods proved to be insufficient for the detection
 and extraction of surfaces we reoriented our work toward a model-based
 image processing approach.
 It was clear that an understanding of bone morphology from the anatomical
 point of view was needed.
 We have studied the bone morphogenesis with an special interest in the
 upper limbs.
 This study included aspects from fields as diverse as paleontology, embryology
 and genetics.
\layout Standard

From these elements we developed a procedure for performing image segmentation
 using deformable models.
 Our model was built by emulating the main factors involved in real morphogenesi
s.
 The implemented model uses a triangular mesh for representing the surface
 and a 3D function from which an iso-value implicitly define the position
 of the triangular mesh.
 This dual model allows to take advantage of the particular properties of
 each representation.
 Of particular interest is the facility with which collisions between structures
 can be evaluated.
 Segmentation is performed by fitting the deformable model parameters to
 a real medical image.
 This is done by using an optimization method that update the parameters
 of the implicit function.
\layout Standard

Once having the deformable models we have studied the functionality of bone
 joints.
 This problem is equivalent to the problem of mobility between two structures
 in contact, each one having a particular surface shape.
 The basic elements needed to analyze this problem can be found in the domain
 of geometric kinematics.
 Using concepts from Screw theory we have analysed the mechanical behavior
 of bone joints by studying the evolutes of articular surfaces.
 Our deformable model representation allows easily evaluate these evolutes,
 and from them to stablish the constrains imposed by the joint morphology
 to the movement.
\the_end
